README.md, before:

This script manages a simple database of SHA512 file hashes.

Intro
=====

One can hash all files in a directory (and all subdirectories) quite easily
with a shell alias like the following:

    alias sha512sum-all='find . '\''!'\'' -name SHA512SUM -type f -exec sha512sum {} + >> SHA512SUM'

However, updating this SHA512SUM file is not particularly efficient if we'd
like to avoid rehashing every file in the directory tree. Writing a script to
add and remove entries is relatively easy, but it would also be nice to update
the hashes for files that have changed. Using a plain SHA512SUM file makes it
quite difficult to identify files that have been modified, so this script
stores additional file metadata and stores the hashes in JSON format.

Motivation
==========
A few months ago, my home file server had a Linux software RAID 5 array of four
2TB Seagate Barracuda drives. I've had a great deal of trouble with these
drives -- between my home array and one that I'm in charge of at my university,
I've sent back **six** of them. The 3TB Barracudas seem to be okay so far,
though.

Every one of these drive failures has manifested as unreadable sectors -- the
drives still powered on and identified themselves to the OS correctly. I found
the first such failure while copying some data from my file server to an
external hard drive, and the Linux `md` code dutifully removed the drive from
the array. At this point, my priority #1 became "back up all data before doing
anything else", so I reorganized some data into directories that more-or-less
matched the sizes of the various old hard drives that I could use for backups.
While `rsync`ing to these various drives, I found that **two** of the other
drives also had unreadable sectors that I wasn't aware of.

Since no two drives were unreadable in the same place, I figured I could force
the array online with different sets of three drives and copy whatever subset
of data was readable with those three. I didn't realize how remarkably stupid
this was until I tried it. Since the failed drive wasn't present when I moved
some data to different directories, the ext4 filesystem wasn't in a consistent
state. I hadn't actually changed the contents of any files while moving things
around, so file content was okay as far as I could tell. The corruption was
limited to filesystem metadata, so I had to manually figure out which
directories had some of their contents dumped into `lost+found` after a `fsck`.

This script is useful for keeping an up-to-date manifest of a directory tree
along with SHA512 hashes. Finding the extent of filesystem corruption is as
easy as `hash_db.py verify`, provided that the hash database is current.

After writing this, I realized that it would also be very useful for the USB
drive that I use to store various diagnostic/malware removal utilities. This
script can be used to verify that no extra files have been added to the drive
and that no EXE files have been tampered with.

Usage
=====

The basic invocation of the script is of the form

    hash_db.py [global options] command [command-specific options]

Global Options
--------------

* `--pretend`

  Omits writing the (new or modified) database to disk.

Commands
--------

* `init`

  Creates a hash database in the current directory. Walks the directory tree
  and adds all files to the database. After completion, prints the list of
  added files.
* `update`

  Reads the hash database into memory and walks the directory tree to find any
  noteworthy files. This includes files that are not included in the hash
  database, files that have been removed since the last update, and files with
  a size or modification time that don't match the recorded values. Entries in
  the database are added, updated or modified as appropriate, and the new
  database is written to disk.
* `status`

  Reports added, modified, and removed files without performing any file
  hashing.

  Note that certain filesystems (vfat in particular) seem to report
  spurious mtime changes, and `status` necessarily will report such files.
  `update --pretend` can be used to filter these false positives at the cost of
  hashing each modified file.
* `verify`

  Reads the hash database into memory and hashes each file on disk. Reports
  each hash mismatch or file removal.

  Options:
  * `--verbose-failures`

    If hash verification fails, print filenames as soon as they are known in
    addition to the post-hashing summary.
* `import`

  Initializes a hash database from a `SHA512SUM` file. Walks the directory tree
  to read the size and modification time of each file, but uses the saved hash
  values instead of hashing each file on disk.
* `split`

  Required argument: `subdir`.

  Reads the hash database into memory, filters those entries that are
  contained in `subdir`, and writes the reduced hash database to
  `subdir/hash_db.json`.
* `export`

  Writes hash entries to a `SHA512SUM` file in the same directory as
  `hash_db.json`.

Requirements
============

Python 3.3 or newer.

Open Issues
===========

* The import functionality is quite limited. Hashes are only read from one
  `SHA512SUM` file, but it would be much nicer to read all `SHA512SUM` and
  `hash_db.json` files that are present. This would allow the easy and
  efficient creation of a "parent" hash database from those in subdirectories.
* During the `verify` operation, it would be nice to pretty-print the number of
  bytes hashed instead of or in addition to the number of files.
* As mentioned above, my main motivation for writing this script was identifying
  the extent of filesystem corruption. It's easy to find what's missing after
  an `fsck`, but it would be much more helpful to hash everything that was
  dumped into `lost+found` to put these files back where they belong.
* Sometimes it's very difficult to avoid mtime changes when copying data
  between filesystems, and it would be nice if the `verify` command had an
  `--update-mtimes` option. I originally intended the `verify` command to only
  look at the hash database and not update it, but it makes a lot of sense to
  have an easy way to reset the stored mtime if hash verification succeeds.

<!---
# vim: set tw=79:
-->

Commit message:

Implement `verify --update-mtimes` option

README.md, after:

This script manages a simple database of SHA512 file hashes.

Intro
=====

One can hash all files in a directory (and all subdirectories) quite easily
with a shell alias like the following:

    alias sha512sum-all='find . '\''!'\'' -name SHA512SUM -type f -exec sha512sum {} + >> SHA512SUM'

However, updating this SHA512SUM file is not particularly efficient if we'd
like to avoid rehashing every file in the directory tree. Writing a script to
add and remove entries is relatively easy, but it would also be nice to update
the hashes for files that have changed. Using a plain SHA512SUM file makes it
quite difficult to identify files that have been modified, so this script
stores additional file metadata and stores the hashes in JSON format.

Motivation
==========
A few months ago, my home file server had a Linux software RAID 5 array of four
2TB Seagate Barracuda drives. I've had a great deal of trouble with these
drives -- between my home array and one that I'm in charge of at my university,
I've sent back **six** of them. The 3TB Barracudas seem to be okay so far,
though.

Every one of these drive failures has manifested as unreadable sectors -- the
drives still powered on and identified themselves to the OS correctly. I found
the first such failure while copying some data from my file server to an
external hard drive, and the Linux `md` code dutifully removed the drive from
the array. At this point, my priority #1 became "back up all data before doing
anything else", so I reorganized some data into directories that more-or-less
matched the sizes of the various old hard drives that I could use for backups.
While `rsync`ing to these various drives, I found that **two** of the other
drives also had unreadable sectors that I wasn't aware of.

Since no two drives were unreadable in the same place, I figured I could force
the array online with different sets of three drives and copy whatever subset
of data was readable with those three. I didn't realize how remarkably stupid
this was until I tried it. Since the failed drive wasn't present when I moved
some data to different directories, the ext4 filesystem wasn't in a consistent
state. I hadn't actually changed the contents of any files while moving things
around, so file content was okay as far as I could tell. The corruption was
limited to filesystem metadata, so I had to manually figure out which
directories had some of their contents dumped into `lost+found` after a `fsck`.

This script is useful for keeping an up-to-date manifest of a directory tree
along with SHA512 hashes. Finding the extent of filesystem corruption is as
easy as `hash_db.py verify`, provided that the hash database is current.

After writing this, I realized that it would also be very useful for the USB
drive that I use to store various diagnostic/malware removal utilities. This
script can be used to verify that no extra files have been added to the drive
and that no EXE files have been tampered with.

Usage
=====

The basic invocation of the script is of the form

    hash_db.py [global options] command [command-specific options]

Global Options
--------------

* `--pretend`

  Omits writing the (new or modified) database to disk.

Commands
--------

* `init`

  Creates a hash database in the current directory. Walks the directory tree
  and adds all files to the database. After completion, prints the list of
  added files.
* `update`

  Reads the hash database into memory and walks the directory tree to find any
  noteworthy files. This includes files that are not included in the hash
  database, files that have been removed since the last update, and files with
  a size or modification time that don't match the recorded values. Entries in
  the database are added, updated or modified as appropriate, and the new
  database is written to disk.
* `status`

  Reports added, modified, and removed files without performing any file
  hashing.

  Note that certain filesystems (vfat in particular) seem to report
  spurious mtime changes, and `status` necessarily will report such files.
  `update --pretend` can be used to filter these false positives at the cost of
  hashing each modified file.
* `verify`

  Reads the hash database into memory and hashes each file on disk. Reports
  each hash mismatch or file removal.

  Options:
  * `--verbose-failures`

    If hash verification fails, print filenames as soon as they are known in
    addition to the post-hashing summary.

  * `--update-mtimes`

    If hash verification of a file succeeds, update its stored modification
    time to match that of the file on disk.
* `import`

  Initializes a hash database from a `SHA512SUM` file. Walks the directory tree
  to read the size and modification time of each file, but uses the saved hash
  values instead of hashing each file on disk.
* `split`

  Required argument: `subdir`.

  Reads the hash database into memory, filters those entries that are
  contained in `subdir`, and writes the reduced hash database to
  `subdir/hash_db.json`.
* `export`

  Writes hash entries to a `SHA512SUM` file in the same directory as
  `hash_db.json`.

Requirements
============

Python 3.3 or newer.

Open Issues
===========

* The import functionality is quite limited. Hashes are only read from one
  `SHA512SUM` file, but it would be much nicer to read all `SHA512SUM` and
  `hash_db.json` files that are present. This would allow the easy and
  efficient creation of a "parent" hash database from those in subdirectories.
* During the `verify` operation, it would be nice to pretty-print the number of
  bytes hashed instead of or in addition to the number of files.
* As mentioned above, my main motivation for writing this script was identifying
  the extent of filesystem corruption. It's easy to find what's missing after
  an `fsck`, but it would be much more helpful to hash everything that was
  dumped into `lost+found` to put these files back where they belong.

<!---
# vim: set tw=79:
-->
